Athena quickstart (#6354)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/athena-qs.md

    - If this is your first time in the Athena console (in your current AWS Region), click **Explore the query editor** to open the query editor. Otherwise, Athena opens automatically in the query editor.
1. Open **Settings** and find the **Location of query result box** field.
    1. Enter the path of the S3 bucket (prefix it with `s3://`).
    2. Navigate to **Browse S3**, select the S3 bucket you created, and click **Choose**.
1. **Save** these settings.
1. In the **query editor**, create a database by running `create database YOUR_DATABASE_NAME`.
1. To make the database you created the one you `write` into, select it from the **Database** list on the left side menu. 
1. Access the Jaffle Shop data in the S3 bucket using one of these options:
    1. Manually create the tables.
    2. Create a glue crawler to recreate the data as external tables (recommended).
1. Once the tables have been created, you will able to `SELECT` from them. 

## Set up security access to Athena

To setup the security access for Athena, determine which access method you want to use: 
* Obtain `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` (recommended)

> * Obtain an `aws_profile_name` that matches your profile defined in your **AWS credentials** file.

Author: ```suggestion
* Obtain an **AWS credentials** file.
```

> ### AWS access key

Author: ```suggestion
### AWS access key (recommended)
```

To obtain your `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key`:

1. Open the **AWS Console**.
1. Click on your **username** near the top right and click **Security Credentials**.
1. Click on **Users** in the sidebar.
1. Click on your **username** (or the name of the user for whom to create the key).
1. Click on the **Security Credentials** tab.
1. Click **Create Access Key**.
1. Click **Show User Security Credentials** and 

Save the `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` for a future step.

> ### AWS credentials file

Author: @amychen1776 Should we even include this?

Reviewer: I think we should keep this!

> ### AWS profile name

Author: ```suggestion
### AWS credentials file
```

To obtain your AWS credentials file:
1. Follow the instructions for [configuring the credentials file](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/v1/userguide/cli-configure-files.html) usin the AWS CLI

> 1. Locate the file on your computer

Author: ```suggestion
1. Locate the `~/.aws/credentials` file on your computer
```

    1. Windows: `%USERPROFILE%\.aws\credentials`
    2. Mac/Linux: `~/.aws/credentials`

> Save the `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` from the file for a future step.

Author: ```suggestion
Retrieve the `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` from the `~/.aws/credentials` file for a future step.
```

:::tip Videos for you
You can check out [dbt Fundamentals](https://learn.getdbt.com/courses/dbt-fundamentals) for free if you're interested in course learning with videos.
:::

### Prerequisites​

- You have a [dbt Cloud account](https://www.getdbt.com/signup/). 
- You have an [AWS account](https://aws.amazon.com/).
- You have set up [Amazon Athena](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/getting-started.html).

### Related content

- Learn more with [dbt Learn courses](https://learn.getdbt.com)
- [CI jobs](/docs/deploy/continuous-integration)
- [Deploy jobs](/docs/deploy/deploy-jobs)
- [Job notifications](/docs/deploy/job-notifications)
- [Source freshness](/docs/deploy/source-freshness)

## Getting started

Download these CSV files (the Jaffle Shop sample data) that you will need for this guide:
    - [jaffle_shop_customers.csv](https://dbt-tutorial-public.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/jaffle_shop_customers.csv)
    - [jaffle_shop_orders.csv](https://dbt-tutorial-public.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/jaffle_shop_orders.csv)
    - [stripe_payments.csv](https://dbt-tutorial-public.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/stripe_payments.csv)

## Set up an Amazon S3 bucket

> For the following guide you can use an existing S3 bucket or create a new one.

Reviewer 2: Can we link to instructions?

> For the following guide you can use an existing S3 bucket or create a new one.

Author: ```suggestion
For the following guide you can use an existing S3 bucket or [create a new one](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/create-bucket-overview.html).
```

> In either case, download the following CSV files (the Jaffle Shop sample data) and load them into your S3 bucket:

Reviewer 2: The following bullets are [repeated above](https://docs-getdbt-com-git-athena-qs-dbt-labs.vercel.app/guides/athena-qs). Can we combine these secitons?

Author: Good call out. Not sure how I missed that

- [jaffle_shop_customers.csv](https://dbt-tutorial-public.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/jaffle_shop_customers.csv)
- [jaffle_shop_orders.csv](https://dbt-tutorial-public.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/jaffle_shop_orders.csv)
- [stripe_payments.csv](https://dbt-tutorial-public.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/stripe_payments.csv)

## Configure Amazon Athena

1. Log into your AWS account and navigate to the **Athena console**.

>     - If this is your first time in the Athena console (in your current AWS Region), click **Explore the query editor** to open the query editor. Otherwise, Athena opens automatically in the query editor and take one of the following actions:

Reviewer: I'm a little confused about what happens with the two actions? What are the two actions?

Author: I feel like I didn't mean to put that there

>     - If this is your first time in the Athena console (in your current AWS Region), click **Explore the query editor** to open the query editor. Otherwise, Athena opens automatically in the query editor and take one of the following actions:

Author: ```suggestion
    - If this is your first time in the Athena console (in your current AWS Region), click **Explore the query editor** to open the query editor. Otherwise, Athena opens automatically in the query editor.
```

1. Open **Settings** and find the **Location of query result box** field.
    1. Enter the path of the S3 bucket (prefix it with `s3://`).
    2. Navigate to **Browse S3**, select the S3 bucket you created, and click **Choose**.

> 1. **Save** the settings configurations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Save** these settings.
```

> 1. **Save** the settings configuerations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Save** the settings configurations
```

1. In the **query editor**, create a database by running `create database YOUR_DATABASE_NAME`.

> 1. To make the database you created your current, select it from the **Database** list on the left side menu. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To make the database you created the one you `write` into, select it from the **Database** list on the left side menu. 
```

> 1. There are 2 options to access the Jaffle Shop data in the S3 bucket:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Access the Jaffle Shop data in the S3 bucket using one of these options:
```

>     1. Manually create the tables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. Manually create the tables.
```

>     2. Create a glue crawler to recreate the data as external tables (recommended)

Reviewer 2: We might want to link to this? https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/data-sources-glue.html
```suggestion
    2. Create a glue crawler to recreate the data as external tables (recommended).
```

1. Once the tables have been created, you will able to `SELECT` from them. 

## Set up security access to Athena

To setup the security access for Athena, determine which access method you want to use: 

>     1. The `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` (recommended)

Reviewer 2: Change to bullets because they're not steps they're a choice.
```suggestion
* Obtain `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` (recommended)
```

>     2. An `aws_profile_name` that matches your profile defined in your **AWS credentials** file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Obtain an `aws_profile_name` that matches your profile defined in your **AWS credentials** file.
```

### AWS access key

To obtain your `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key`:

1. Open the **AWS Console**.
1. Click on your **username** near the top right and click **Security Credentials**.
1. Click on **Users** in the sidebar.
1. Click on your **username** (or the name of the user for whom to create the key).
1. Click on the **Security Credentials** tab.
1. Click **Create Access Key**.
1. Click **Show User Security Credentials** and 

Save the `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` for a future step.

### AWS profile name

To obtain your AWS credentials file:
1. Follow the instructions for [configuring the credentials file](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/v1/userguide/cli-configure-files.html) usin the AWS CLI
1. Locate the file on your computer
    1. Windows: `%USERPROFILE%\.aws\credentials`
    2. Mac/Linux: `~/.aws/credentials`

> Save the `aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key` from the file for a future step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Save the `aws_profile_name` and password from the downloaded file for a future step.
```

Author: The original was correct. Those fields are what they retrieve from the file

Author: These are the fields that would be in the file. I messed up and neglected to name the file above.

## Configure the connection in dbt Cloud

To configure the Athena connection in dbt Cloud:
1. Click your **account name** on the left-side menu and click **Account settings**.
1. Click **Connections** and click **New connection**.

> 1. Click **Athena** and fill out the required fields (and any optional fields you want).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Click **Athena** and fill out the required fields (and any optional fields).
```

    1. **AWS region name** &mdash; The AWS region of your environment.
    1. **Database (catalog)** &mdash; Enter the database name created in earlier steps (lowercase only).
    1. **AWS S3 staging directory** &mdash; Enter the S3 bucket created in earlier steps.
1. Click **Save**

### Configure your environment

To configure the Athena credentials in your environment:
1. Click **Deploy** on the left-side menu and click **Environments**.
1. Click **Create environment** and fill out the **General settings**. 
    - Your **dbt version** must be set to `Versionless` to use the Athena connection. 
1. Select the Athena connection from the **Connection** dropdown. 

> 1. Fill out the `aws_access_key` and `aws_access_id` recorded in previous steps, as well as the `Schema` to write to. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Fill out the `aws_access_key` and `aws_access_id` or the `aws_profile_name` and password recorded in previous steps, as well as the `Schema` to write to. 
```

Author: See above
